# EMS - Event Management System API

**PROJECT DESCRIPTION**
This project is an Employee Management System API built using Spring Boot. It manages Departments, Employees, Roles, and User Accounts with pagination, filtering, validation, soft delete, and JWT-based authentication and authorization.

**TECHNOLOGIES USED:**
- Java & Spring Boot
- Spring Security & JWT
- Maven
- JPA Hibernate
- MySQL
- Postman

---

## FEATURES
- User registration and login with JWT authentication
- Secure API endpoints using Spring Security
- Employee and Department creation, updating, and deletion
- User Creation
- Role-based access control (Admin/Hr/Employee)
- Specification for dynamic filtering or searching

---

## SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
config # Configuration classes (e.g., BCrypt, AuthenticationManager)<br>
controller # REST controllers<br>
dto # Data Transfer Objects<br>
entity # JPA entities / database models<br>
exception # Custom exceptions<br>
mapper # Object mappers (DTO ↔ Entity)<br>
repository # Spring Data JPA repositories<br>
security # JWT filters, Security config<br>
service # Business logic<br>
specification # JPA Specifications for filtering/searching

## JWT AUTHENTICATION WORKFLOW
1. Get the Authorization header from the request using .getHeader().
2. Check if the header is not null and starts with "Bearer ".
3. If true, remove "Bearer " using substring() to get only the token.
4. Validate the token:
 * Check the signature
 * Check if it is generated by the server
 * Check if it is not expired
5. If valid, extract claims or the username from the token.
   
Second Part – Authentication

6. Check if the username is not null and the SecurityContextHolder is not yet authenticated.
7. Load user details from the database using loadUserByUsername().
8. Create an Authentication object using UsernamePasswordAuthenticationToken.
9. Store the Authentication object inside SecurityContextHolder (this is the security storage for the request).
10. Continue the filter chain to allow Spring Security to proceed with authorization checks.

##⚙️Configuration<br>
Security Configuration<br>
The SecurityConfig class handles:<br>

Password encoding using BCrypt<br>
JWT filter integration<br>
CORS configuration<br>
Endpoint security rules<br>
Authentication manager setup<br>
JWT Configuration<br>
Token Expiration: Configurable via jwt.expiration property<br>
Secret Key: Set via jwt.secret property<br>
Algorithm: HS256 (HMAC with SHA-256)<br>
Database Configuration<br>
DDL Auto: Set to update for automatic schema updates<br>
Connection Pooling: Uses HikariCP by default<br>
Transaction Management: Enabled with @Transactional annotation<br>

### API ENDPOINTS

## Employee Endpoints

POST   /employee  - Create employee	
```json
{
    "name": "Robert Arpia",
    "departmentID": 2,
    "email": "bobyes@gmail.com",
    "salary": 50000
}

{
    "id": 12,
    "name": "Robert Arpia",
    "email": "bobyes@gmail.com",
    "salary": 50000,
    "status": "ACTIVE",
    "hireDate": "2026-03-13",
    "departmentId": 2,
    "createdAt": "2026-03-13T14:13:32.160534"
}

```
##Error Handling

```json

##Required Field

{
    "message": "Name is required",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:35:58.7426021"
}

{
    "message": "Department ID is required",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:38:44.3652061"
}

{
    "message": "Email is required",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:37:27.5653942"
}

{
    "message": "Salary is required",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:38:23.9224299"
}

##Field Formats

{
    "message": "Email format is invalid",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:42:55.7871133"
}

{
    "message": "salary must be a number",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:53:07.6861623"
}

##Length Constraints

{
    "message": "Name must be at least 3 Characters long",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:55:02.6444005"
}

{
    "message": "Name must not exceed 30 characters",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:57:11.1337857"
}




##Business Rules

{
    "message": "Email 'bobyes@gmail.com' is existing",
    "status": 409,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:16:06.9290679"
}

{
    "message": "Department ID '15' not Found ",
    "status": 404,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:16:56.409019"
}

{
    "message": "Salary must be greater than zero",
    "status": 400,
    "timestamp": "2026-03-13T14:17:14.698865"
}

```









